Since the beginning of time on
our planet, tectonic plates have
been slow dancing on earth's uppermost mantle.
Where they touch, earth's brittle skin reveals the
immense forces beneath through towering mountains,
sudden earthquakes, and vast canyons diverging.
The most accessible example of such a divergent
zone is the Great Rift Valley, which has impacted
the topography from southern Turkey through the
horn of Africa, all the way down to Mozambique.
The system is especially pronounced in East
Africa, where the parting of the Somali and
Nubian Plate has formed the Albertine Rift
full of rugged ridges and deep valleys.
The deepest and largest of these valleys have
eventually filled with Africa's abundant tropical
rainfall and are now forming the African Great
lakes. Along the 3000 kilometer long crescent,
a series of 7 major lakes have captured 25% of the
world's freshwater and the southernmost one, Lake
Malawi is home to some fascinating peculiarities,
which we will explore in this video.
Before we get into the oddities however,
let’s lay some groundwork and quickly go
over the geographical key facts.
Chapter 1: Lake Malawi in numbers
At 29.600 square kilometers, roughly the
size of Belgium or the US state of Maryland,
Lake Malawi, or Lake Nyassa as it is called on
the eastern banks in Mozambique and Tanzania,
ranks among the largest lakes in the world.
The north to south span of over 560 kilometers
follows the shape of the western arm of the East
African Rift Valley, which sank the lakebed over
2200 meters below the surrounding plateau.
In this valley, Lake Malawi is reaching a
depth of over 700 meters at the deepest section
securing it the rank of the 8th deepest lake of
the planet with the 4th largest volume of any
freshwater lake. However, this level is just a
snapshot in the hydrographic history of the lake.
In 2005, a team of researchers extracted a 380
meter deep continuous sediment
sample from the lake bottom,
which reveals the past 1.3 million years of
uninterrupted hydrological history and gives
a detailed timeline of volcanic eruptions, the
climate and changes to the lake’s biodiversity.
Mapping the readings reveals that the lake has
undergone a total of 24 cycles from flood to
drought in this period with level swings of over
600 meters changing the lake’s characteristic
from its status as a freshwater tank to a shallow,
saline and alkaline water body and back again.
Today, the surface level has found somewhat of an
equilibrium with the inflow of the lakes drainage
basin, which lies as a narrow band around
the lake sufficing to balance the very high
evaporation rate. The remaining water of this
balance is drained through Lake Malawi's only
outflow through the Shire river in the south,
carrying the water along the rift valley until
it confluences with the majestic Zambezi River.
Heading back to the lake, it’s finally time
to look at the curiosities contained in
and around these waters, bringing us to
Chapter 2: Peculiarities of lake Malawi
Being placed in the middle of a massive graben,
Lake Malawi is surrounded by uplifted rift
shoulders and as such quite secluded from many
external influences. In the study of evolutionary
biology, such environments often act similar to
remote islands and adaptive radiation creates an
abundance of variance in species from a common
ancestor. Where the Galapagos Islands have the
Finch which were famously studied by Charles
Darwin and served as the foundation for the
theory of evolution, Lake Malawi has the Cichlids.
This family of small colorful fish has rapidly
evolved along the shores of Lake Malawi,
with hundreds of closely related but distinct
species sharing the lagoons and rocky shores.
Due to their distinct chromatic features with
shimmering scales they are the most popular
ornamental aquarium fish today. From the 2000 species
of Cichlids which have been described globally,
mainly around the tropics of the Americas, Africa,
India and the Middle East, 800 of these are found
in Lake Malawi alone, making it a true wild
aquarium and the most species rich lake in
the world. For the local communities, these fish
are the backbone of their nutritional balance,
presenting 40% of the people’s protein intake.
An exploding population around the lake and the
resulting overfishing has put a massive strain
on the fish population in recent decades though,
but a partnership of NGOs and local authorities
are actively pushing a transition from fishing
to fish-farming, which will alleviate
the strain on the natural habitats.
Cichlids are not the only source of animal protein
around the lake however. There is another species
which thrives in the unique conditions of the lake
and forms an integral part of the local’s diet.
When environmental conditions align, clouds
the size of skyscrapers are rising from the
center of the lake and perform a dance lasting
just a few days. These clouds are not a weather
phenomenon though, but instead the adult form
of the Chaoborus Edulis, which transforms from
its glassworm state into the lake fly in the
hundreds of billions. Whenever the population
erupts and the black clouds rise in the distance,
the lake residents pull out their nets and
harvest the midges to press them into burger
patties or protein bars known as kunga cakes.
While providing a delicacy to the people living
on the lake shore, the larvae state also plays an
important role for the nutrient cycle within
the lake, extending the habitable zone to
layers way deeper than would otherwise be
possible. As a result of steady temperatures
and very little in- and outflow of the lake,
Lake Malawi is classified as a meromictic lake,
which means that its waterlayers experience little
to no mixing. As a consequence of this,
organic matter and nutrients are often trapped
in the bright upper layers of the lake,
but this is where the glassworm comes in.
To evade predators in daylight, hundreds of
billions of glassworms migrate from the light
to the dark columns at dawn, down to depths of
around 200 meters. Their daily migration creates
a natural pump of nutrients to the otherwise
deep and dark layers, which then allows
largerfauna that feed on these larvae
to extend way deeper into the lake strata.
While life in the lake runs like a well
greased machine in predictable cycles,
the same can not be said for the political
situation of the Nations surrounding the
shore. For decades now, the situation around
Lake Malawi has been tense, bringing us to
Chapter 3: The political Geography around Lake Malawi
Zooming on the northern half of the lake
on Google Maps, two dashed lines are
separating the countries of Malawi and
Tanzania. You can recognize this form of
demarcation from places like the the Kashmir
region, or Kosovo and it means that there
are some long lasting border
disagreements here. In the case of Lake Malawi,
the convoluted colonial past of the British,
Portuguese and German occupiers in the region is
leaving the borders of the lake in a stalemate.
While the Portuguese in Mozambique left with a
1954 agreement in place which splits the lake
in half to the satisfaction of both countries,
the northern section between the British and
German colonial remnants is more contentious. In
1890, the Heligoland Treaty allocated the entirety
of this lake section to Nyasaland, the predecessor
of today’s Malawi. With the release of the
colonial possessions in 1961 and 1964 however,
disagreements quickly arose between the two new
nations, where Malawi is referring to this treaty,
whereas Tanzania prefers a more modern approach
to the demarcation of country borders.
Since the 20th century, the territorial
demarcation between neighboring states
across bodies of water has been done through
the principle of equidistance. This principle
was mostly created for delimiting territorial
waters across seas and channels, but was quickly
adapted to rivers and lakes as well. This has
since been the foundation of Tanzania's counter
claim instead of following a century old treaty
that has been drafted by their oppressors.
With the formulation of the law of the sea by the
United Nations in 1982 Tanzania's position only
got stronger, yet Malawi continues to fish and
license fossil fuel exploration in the disputed
zone. While no armed conflict arose so far,
talks have been dragging on for decades and
a misinformation campaign by Tanzania with a
fabricated press release claiming that Malawi has
accepted the convention of the law of the sea has
further fueled the situation in June 2025.
So far there is no end to the disagreement
in sight and looking back at the immense
population relying on stability in the region
and the resources of the lake, we can just hope a
sustainable and fair solution will be found soon.
Overall, Lake Malawi is a phenomenon of true
extremes. Built within one of mother nature's
most ambitious projects currently reshaping the
planet, it fosters an incredible biodiversity
and should be guarded as a natural treasure
trove. If you want to learn more about the
most fascinating lakes in the world I can
recommend this video about Lake Baikal,
the deepest lake in the world, nestled in
another rift valley in the depths of Siberia,
or watch what youtube thinks is best for
you here. See you in the next one, cheers.